                                  © 2023 IJRTI | Volume 8, Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-3315 
  
IJRTI2304061 International Journal for Research Trends and Innovation (www.ijrti.org) 356 
 
RESEARCH PAPER ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE & 
ITS APPLICATIONS 
 
 
Prof. Neha Saini 
 
Assistant Professor in Department of Computer Science & IT 
SDAM College Dinanagar 
 
ABSTRACT- 
 
It is the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to 
the similar task of using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to methods that 
are biologically observable. While no consensual definition of Artificial Intelligence (AI) exists, AI is broadly characteriz ed 
as the study of computa tions that allow for perception, reason and action.  Today, the amount of data that is generated, by 
both humans and machines, far outpaces humans’ ability to absorb, interpret, and make complex decisions based on that data. 
Artificial intelligence forms th e basis for all computer learning and is the future of all complex decision making.  This paper 
examines features of artificial Intelligence, introduction, definitions of AI, history, applications, growth and achievements . 
 
KEYWORDS- machine learning,deep learning,neural networks,Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Base System         
 
            INTRODUCTION- 
 
Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) is the branch of computer science which deals with intelligence of machines where an intelligent agent 
is a system that takes actions which maximize its chances of success. It is the study of ideas which enable computers to do the things 
that make people seem intelligent. The central principles of AI include such as reasoning, knowledge, p lanning, learning, 
communication, perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects. It is the science and engineering of making intelli gent 
machines, especially intelligent computer programs 
 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE METHODS: 
Machine Learning- 
It is one of the applications of AI where machines are not explicitly programmed to perform certain tasks; rather, they learn  and 
improve from experience automatically. Deep Learning is a subset of machine learning based on artificial neural netw orks for 
predictive analysis. There are various machine learning algorithms, such as Unsupervised Learning, Supervised Learning, and 
Reinforcement Learning. In Unsupervised Learning, the algorithm does not use classified information to act on it without an y 
guidance. In Supervised Learning, it deduces a function from the training data, which consists of a set of an input object an d the 
desired output. Reinforcement learning is used by machines to take suitable actions to increase the reward to find the best possibility 
which should be taken in to account. 
Natural Language Processing(NLP) 
It is the interactions between computers and human language where the computers are programmed to process natural languages. 
Machine Learning is a reliable technology for Natural Language Processing to obtain meaning from human languages. In NLP, the 
audio of a human talk is captured by the machine. Then the audio to text conversation occurs, and then the text is processed where 
the data is converted into audio. Then the mach ine uses the audio to respond to humans. Applications of  Natural Language 
Processing can be found in IVR (Interactive Voice Response) applications used in call centres, language translation applications 
like Google Translate and word processors such as Microsoft Word to check the accuracy of grammar in text. However, the natur e 
of human languages makes the Natural Language Processing difficult becaus e of the rules which are involved in the passing of 
information using natural language, and they are not easy for the computers to understand. So NLP uses algorithms to recogniz e 
and abstract the rules of the natural languages where the unstructured data f rom the human languages can be converted to a format 
that is understood by the computer. 
Automation & Robotics- 
The purpose of Automation is to get the monotonous and repetitive tasks done by machines which also improve productivity and 
in receiving cost -effective and more efficient results. Many organizations use machine learning,  neural networks, and graphs in 
                                  © 2023 IJRTI | Volume 8, Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-3315 
  
IJRTI2304061 International Journal for Research Trends and Innovation (www.ijrti.org) 357 
 
automation. Such automation can prevent fraud issues while financial transactions online by using CAPTCHA technology. Robotic 
process automation is programmed to perform high volume repetitive tasks which can adapt to the change in different circumstances. 
Machine Vision- 
Machines can capture visual information and then analyze it. Here cameras are used to capture the visual information, the analogue 
to digital conversion is used to convert the image to digital data, and digital signal processing is employed to process the data. Then 
the resulting data is  fed to a computer. In machine vision, two vital aspects are sensitivity, which is the ability of the machine to 
perceive impulses that are weak and resolution, the range to which the machine can distinguish the objects. The usage of mach ine 
vision can be found in signature identification, pattern recognition, and medical image analysis, etc. 
Knowledge-Based Systems(KBS): 
A KBS can be defined as a computer system capable of giving advice in a particular domain, utilizing knowledge provided by a 
human expert. A distinguishing feature of KBS lies in the separation behind the knowledge, which can be represented in a numb er 
of ways such as rules, frames, or case s, and the inference engine or algorithm which uses the knowledge base to arr ive at a 
conclusion. 
Neural Networks: 
 
NNs are biologically inspired systems consisting of a massively connected network of computational “neurons,” organized in layers. 
By adjusting the weights of the network, NNs can be “trained” to approximate virtually any nonlinear function to a required degree 
of accuracy. NNs typically are provided with a set of input and output exemplars. A learning algorithm (such as back propagat ion) 
would then be used to adjust the weights in the network so that the network would give the desired output, in a type of learning 
commonly called supervised learning. 
Applications of AI 
Artificial Intelligence has various applications in today's society. It is becoming essential for today's time because it can solve 
complex problems with an efficient way in multiple industries, such as Healthcare, entertainment, finance, education, etc. AI  is 
making our daily life more comfortable and fast. 
Following are some sectors which have the application of Artificial Intelligence:  
 

                                  © 2023 IJRTI | Volume 8, Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-3315 
  
IJRTI2304061 International Journal for Research Trends and Innovation (www.ijrti.org) 358 
 
1. AI in Astronomy 
o Artificial Intelligence can be very useful to solve complex universe problems. AI technology can be helpful for 
understanding the universe such as how it works, origin, etc. 
2. AI in Healthcare 
o In the last, five to ten years, AI becoming more advantageous for the healthcare industry and going to have a significant 
impact on this industry. 
o Healthcare Industries are applying AI to make a better and faster dia gnosis than humans. AI can help doctors with 
diagnoses and can inform when patients are worsening so that medical help can reach to the patient before hospitalization. 
3. AI in Gaming 
o AI can be used for gaming purpose. The AI machines can play strategic games like chess, where the machine needs to 
think of a large number of possible places. 
4. AI in Finance 
o AI and finance industries are the best matches for each other. The finance industry is implementing automation, chatbot, 
adaptive intelligence, algorithm trading, and machine learning into financial processes. 
5. AI in Data Security 
o The security of data is crucial for every company and cyber -attacks are growing very rapidly in the digital world. AI can 
be used to make your data more safe and s ecure. Some examples such as AEG bot, AI2 Platform,are used to determine 
software bug and cyber-attacks in a better way. 
6. AI in Social Media 
o Social Media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and Snapchat contain billions of user profiles, which need to be st ored and 
managed in a very efficient way. AI can organize and manage massive amounts of data. AI can analyze lots of data to 
identify the latest trends, hashtag, and requirement of different users. 
7. AI in Travel & Transport 
o AI is becoming highly demandin g for travel industries. AI is capable of doing various travel related works such as from 
making travel arrangement to suggesting the hotels, flights, and best routes to the customers. Travel industries are using 
AI-powered chatbots which can make human-like interaction with customers for better and fast response. 
8. AI in Automotive Industry 
o Some Automotive industries are using AI to provide virtual assistant to their user for better performance. Such as Tesla 
has introduced TeslaBot, an intelligent virtual assistant. 
o Various Industries are currently working for developing self -driven cars which can make your journey more safe and 
secure. 
9. AI in Robotics: 
o Artificial Intelligence has a remarkable role in Robotics. Usually, general robots are programmed such that they can 
perform some repetitive task, but with the help of AI, we can create intelligent robots which can perform tasks with their 
own experiences without pre-programmed. 
o Humanoid Robots are best examples for AI in robotics, recently the intelligent Humanoid robot named as Erica and Sophia 
has been developed which can talk and behave like humans. 
 
10. AI in Entertainment 
                                  © 2023 IJRTI | Volume 8, Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-3315 
  
IJRTI2304061 International Journal for Research Trends and Innovation (www.ijrti.org) 359 
 
11. AI in Agriculture 
o Agriculture is an area which requires various resources, labor, money, and time for best result. Now a day's agriculture is 
becoming digital, and AI is emerging in this field. Agriculture is applying AI as agriculture robotics, solid and crop 
monitoring, predictive analysis. AI in agriculture can be very helpful for farmers.  
12. AI in E-commerce 
o AI is providing a competitive edge to the e -commerce industry, and it is becoming more demanding in the e -commerce 
business. AI is helping shoppers to discover associated products with recommended size, color, or even brand.  
13. AI in education: 
o AI can automate grading so that the tutor can have more time to teach. AI chatbot can communicate with students as a 
teaching assistant. 
o AI in the future can be work as a personal virtual tutor for students, which will be accessible easily at any time and any 
place. 
SOME OTHER APPLICATIONS: 
 
1. Fraud detection. The financial services industry uses artificial intelligence in two ways. Initial scoring of applications for 
credit uses AI to understand creditworthiness. More advanced AI engines are employed to monitor and detect fraudulent 
payment card transactions in real time. 
2. Virtual customer assistance (VCA).  Call centers use VCA to predict and respond to customer inquiries outside of human 
interaction. Voice recognition, coupled with simulated human dialog, is the firs t point of interaction in a customer service 
inquiry. Higher-level inquiries are redirected to a human. 
3. Medicine: A medical clinic can use AI systems to organize bed schedules, make a staff rotation, and provide medical 
information. AI has also application  in fields of cardiology (CRG), neurology (MRI), embryology (sonography), complex 
operations of internal organs etc. 
4. Heavy Industries : Huge machines involve risk in their manual maintenance and working. So in becomes necessary part to 
have an efficient and safe operation agent in their operation. 
5. Telecommunications: Many telecommunications companies make use of heuristic search in the management of their 
workforcesfor example BT Group has deployed heuristic search in a scheduling application that provides the work schedules 
of 20000 engineers. 
6. Music: Scientists are trying to make the computer emulate the activities of the skillful musician. Composition, performance, 
music theory, sound processing are some of the major areas on which research in Music and Artificial Intelligence are 
focusing on. Eg:chucks, Orchextra, smartmusic etc. 
7. Antivirus: Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques have played increasingly important role in antivirus detection. At present, 
some principal artificial intelligence techniques applied in antivirus detection It improves the performance of an tivirus 
detection systems, and promotes the production of new artificial intelligence algorithm and the application in antivirus 
detection to integrate antivirus detection with artificial intelligence. 
 
Future of AI 
 
Looking at the features and its wide application we may definitely stick to artificial intelligence. Seeing at the development 
of AI, is it that the future world is becoming artificial. Biological intelligence is fixed, because it is an old, mature paradigm, 
but the new paradigm of non-biological computation and intelligence is growing exponentially. The memory capacity of the 
human brain is probably of the order of ten thousand million binary digits. But most of this is probably used in remembering 
visual impressions, and other comparati vely wasteful ways . Hence we can say that as natural intelligence is limited and 
volatile too world may now depend upon computers for smooth working.A rtificial intelligence (AI) is truly a revolutionary 
feat of computer science, set to become a core comp onent of all modern software over the coming years and decades. This 
presents a threat but also an opportunity. AI will be deployed to augment both defensive and offensive cyber operations. 
Additionally, new means of cyber attack will be invented to take a dvantage of the particular weaknesses of AI technology. 
Finally, the importance of data will be amplified by AI’s appetite for large amounts of training data, redefining how we must 
think about data protection. Prudent governance at the global level will b e essential to ensure that this era -defining 
technology will bring about broadly shared safety and prosperity.  
 
 
 
 
 
NetApp and artificial intelligence 
                                  © 2023 IJRTI | Volume 8, Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-3315 
  
IJRTI2304061 International Journal for Research Trends and Innovation (www.ijrti.org) 360 
 
 
As the data authority for hybrid cloud, NetApp understands the value of the access, management, and control of data. The NetApp 
data fabric provides a unified data management environment that spans across edge devices, data centers, and  multiple hyperscale 
clouds. The data fabric gives organizations of all sizes the ability to accelerate critical applications, gain data visibilit y, streamline 
data protection, and increase operational agility. 
NetApp AI solutions are based on the following key building blocks: 
• ONTAP software enables AI and deep learning both on premises and in the hybrid cloud. 
• AFF all-flash systems accelerate AI and deep learning workloads and remove performance bottlenecks.  
• ONTAP Select software enables efficient data collection at the edge, using IoT devices and aggregations points.  
• Cloud Volumes can be used to rapidly prototype new projects and provide the ability to move AI data to and from 
the cloud. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Till now we have discussed in brief about Artificial Intelligence. We have discussed some of its principles, its applications, its 
achievements etc.The ultimate goal of institutions and scientists working on AI is to solve majority of the problems or to achieve 
the tasks which we humans directly c an’t accomplish. It is for sure that development in this field of computer science will change 
the complete scenario of the world Now it is the responsibility of creamy layer of engineers to develop this field.  
 
References 
 
1. http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Computer_Science:Artificial_Intelligence 
http://www.howstuffworks.com/arificialintelligence 
2. http:// www.google.co.in 
3. http://www.library.thinkquest.org 
4. https://www.javatpoint.com/application-of-ai 
5. https://www.educba.com/artificial-intelligence-techniques/ 
6. https://www.cigionline.orgw/articles/cyber-security-
battlefield/?utm_source=google_ads&utm_medium=grant&gclid=EAIaIQobChMIsdz9qLSF_AIVzQ0rCh1bNQylEAA
YAiAAEgI40_D_BwE 